Let's take a typical HTTP request,
trying to access a portfolio page as an example.
The request will make its way down the filter chain until it
reaches the FilterSecurityInterceptor, which is the final filter in the chain.
This filter will call the SecurityMetadataSource to retrieve
the security metadata of the portfolio URL.
Recall back to our SecurityConfiguration class where we configured
the /portfolio URL to require the role USER.
The SecurityMetadataSource will return the config attribute.
In this case, the URL pattern requires the principle to have a role of user.
The interceptor filter will also retrieve the
authenticated principle from the security context,
which, in this case, has the role of user.
It will then call the AccessDecisionManager to decide if the request has
access to that portfolio URL by passing it the request object,
the security metadata, and the Authentication object.
The manager then asks one or more AccessDecisionVoters for their
opinion on whether access should be granted.
The AccessDecisionVoters return their votes to the
AccessDecisionManager who will then make the final decision.
Now let's drill into the AccessDecisionVoters.
It has a number of support methods,
which are called first by the AccessDecisionManager to see if the voter is
capable of voting on the passed ConfigAttribute or object type.
If it is, the vote method is called, passing in the Authentication object,
the secured object being invoked, in this example the HTTP servlet request,
and the security metadata configuration attribute,
returning a vote as an integer value.
The voters can vote one of three ways, to grant access,
returning a value of 1, to deny access, returning a value of -1,
and to abstain, returning 0, meaning they declined to vote.
There are many flavors of the AccessDecisionVoter.
The AuthenticatedVoter,
this is very basic voter that only considers if the user is
authenticated and how they are authenticated,
either by Remember me, anonymously, or via the login page.
Then there is the RoleVoters that additionally consider the principle's role.
The most common voter used by web applications and currently being used
in our demo application is the WebExpressionVoter.
It also handles Spring expressions,
which we will be using heavily in the next sections.
There are many other types of voters, and you can even create your own.
Let's now focus on the AccessDecisionManager.
It also has a support method and a decide method,
which can either throw an AccessDeniedException if the user is not
authorized to access the resource or an
InsufficientAuthenticationException if the user was either not
authenticated or perhaps the user was authenticated via Remember me,
but the resource requires them to be authenticated by the
sign-in for additional security measures.
There are three flavors of the AuthenticationDecisionManager,
which extend the AbstractAccessDecisionManager that
implements the AccessDecisionManager interface.
The AffirmativeBased, which is the default implementation.
It grants access if just one of the voters grants access,
even if the other voters vote to deny or abstain.
The consensus grants access based on the majority of non-abstained voters.
And finally, the unanimous requires all non-abstained voters to grant access.
If just one denies access, it will not be granted.
Okay, so going back to the flow, if the outcome is access-denied,
then the decision manager will throw an AccessDeniedExcpetion,
which will be handled by the ExceptionTranslationFilter.
If we drill into the ExceptionTranslationFilter,
depending on the exception, it will invoke the appropriate exception handler.
In this case, it's the AccessDeniedHandler,
which might return a 403 or perform any action you
configure in your AccessDeniedhanlder.
That's basically it in a nutshell.
Spring provides the ability to layer authorization form course-grained,
like URL or page level, to more finer- grained,
such as method invocation and access control to a domain object. We will demo these in the next sections.